[docs] add a vision document for Swift -> C++ interoperability (#61256)
apple/swift: docs/CppInteroperability/SwiftToCppInteroperabilityVisionDocument.md

## Overview of Swift's interoperability support

Swift uses two very different approaches for interoperability with C and Objective-C. For "forward" interoperability, Swift embeds a copy of the Clang compiler, which it uses to directly load C and Objective-C Clang modules and translate declarations into a native Swift representation. For "reverse" interoperability, Swift does not want to require Clang to embed Swift, and so Swift generates an Objective-C header that can be used to call into Swift APIs that are exposed in that header. Because Objective-C is restricted in what kinds of types it can work with, and because it requires code to be emitted in a special way that doesn't match the regular Swift ABI, methods and types must be marked as being exposed to Objective-C with the `@objc` attribute.

> Swift's support for C++ interoperability is modeled after its support for C and Objective-C interoperability. For "forward" interoperability, the embedded Clang compiler is used to directly load C++ Clang modules and translate declarations into a native Swift representation. The "forward" interoperability [vision document](https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/60501/files) provides more details about this model. For "reverse" interoperability, Swift generates a header that uses C++ language constructs to represent Swift APIs that are exposed by the Swift module. Because C++ is much more expressive and flexible than Objective-C, the generated header is able to provide representation for native Swift functions, methods, initializers, accessors and types. This allows C++ programmers to call into Swift APIs using the familiar C++ function and member function call syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swift's support for C++ interoperability is modeled after its support for C and Objective-C interoperability. For "forward" interoperability, the embedded Clang compiler is used to directly load C++ Clang modules and translate declarations into a native Swift representation. The "forward" interoperability [vision document](https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/60501/files) provides more details about this model. For "reverse" interoperability, Swift generates a header that uses C++ language constructs to represent Swift APIs that are exposed by the Swift module. Because of the relatively high expressivity of C++ headers, the generated header is able to provide representation for most native Swift functions, methods, initializers, accessors and types without needing any extra code to be generated in the Swift module. This allows C++ programmers to call into Swift APIs using the familiar C++ function and member function call syntax.
```

### C++ interoperability is opt-out not opt-in

> 

Reviewer: The Language Workgroup feels that it would be valuable to center the philosophy behind this decision.  It's abstractly always better for interop to work the way that you're proposing for C++: the foreign language consumes the public interface of the Swift code and makes whatever it can available without needing extra code to be emitted by the Swift compiler.  Objective-C interop is specifically constrained by the need to (1) use ObjC-compatible classes and (2) put Objective-C methods directly in their method tables, which inherently requires extra code (and that code has to be in the Swift module unless you generate an extra level of ObjC object wrapper for everything, which would violate other goals).  Those constraints don't apply to C++, so we do the more abstractly preferable thing.

I think you can rework the following paragraph to lead into that philosophy after the first sentence.  You can then talk about things like adding support for the Swift calling convention as enabling a C++ compiler to directly interoperate with a Swift module without extra code.

Author: I rewrote this section following your comment.

> The user model employed by Swift-to-C++ interoperability is different than the user model employed by the Objective-C interoperability. C++ can use Swift's native calling convention when calling Swift functions, and C++ does not have restrictions on what Swift types it can work with. This means that Swift APIs do not require additional annotations when they're bridged to C++. This fact highlights the key difference between C++ and Objective-C interoperability; Swift library author is not required to change their code when their APIs are exposed to C++, whereas they are required to opt-in into interoperability using an `@objc` annotation when exposing APIs to Objective-C. Swift library authors will still be able to opt-out from exposing certain APIs to C++ when they desire to do so.

Reviewer 2: Curious what the use case for the "opt-out" looks like. Are we concerned that there will be Swift constructs that we do expose to C++ as a matter of language policy but (due to their implementation on the Swift side) can't actually be used properly from C++?

Author: I omitted "opt-out" from the vision document now. I don't have a concrete example for "opt-out", but I can think of potential clients hiding function/method overloads that don't map nicely to C++ because of complicated overload signatures involving argument labels.

Author: Perhaps certain types/functions  in the standard library will need to be opted-out as well.

The permissive user model of Swift-to-C++ interoperability implies that any Swift library that can be imported into Swift can also be "imported" into C++, as long as its APIs are representable by the C++ code in the generated header. The Swift compiler can generate this header from the library's module interface file upon user's request, even when the library's author did not have such use case in mind.

## Goals

> 

Reviewer: The Language Workgroup feels that it would be appropriate to lead this section with the high-level goal, explaining why this is interesting to do at all.  Consider starting with something like the two paragraphs I suggested for the forward vision [here](https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/60501#discussion_r1036568365).

Author: I have added a lead paragraph. I also liked the second paragraph you suggested in the other PR about not changing Swift's goals, but I moved it over to the "Swift language evolution and API design should be unaffected" section.

> Swift and C++ are both feature rich programming languages. They share many similar features, but Swift has some features that lack close analogues in C++. The primary goal of Swift-to-C++ interoperability is to expose every language feature of Swift for which a reasonable C++ API can be created to represent that feature. For example, C++ does not have a concept of argument labels, but the argument labels can be integrated into the base name of a function to get a roughly similar effect. On the other hand, C++ does not have any feature that can represent a Swift feature like result builders in a reasonable manner. Therefore, APIs that use Swift features like result builders must be dropped in the C++ interface to the module.

Reviewer 2: Do we actually need to drop something like result builders? That seems to me like a feature that we could support on the C++ side in the "desugared" form, which we already permit people to write even in Swift. I.e., you wouldn't get the nice declarative syntax (or any of the other helpful glue that result builders pull together for you), but you could write out the equivalent post-transform code yourself if you wanted. Have I misunderstood this paragraph?

Author: Sure, that's a valid argument. Fundamentally result builders can be exposed that way. I think it might be better to make a stronger case for another language feature. I updated the doc to talk about macros instead.

### Ergonomics

Swift APIs should be mapped over to C++ language features that have a direct correspondence to the Swift language feature. In cases where a direct correspondence does not exist, the Swift compiler should provide a reasonable approximation to the original Swift language feature using other C++ constructs. For example, Swift’s enum type can contain methods and nested types, and such constructs can’t be represented by a single C++ enum type in an idiomatic manner. Swift’s enum type can be mapped to a C++ class instead that allows both enum-like `switch` statement behavior and also enables the C++ user to invoke member functions on the Swift enum value and access its nested types from C++.

The C++ representation of certain Swift types should be appropriately enhanced to allow them to be used in an idiomatic manner. For instance, it should be possible to use Swift’s `Array` type (or any type that conforms to `Collection`) in a ranged-based for loop in C++. Such enhancements should be done with safety in mind, to ensure that Swift’s memory model is not violated.

> Correct modeling of certain Swift type semantics in C++ requires additional overhead. This issue is most prominent when modeling Swift's `take` operation, as it performs a destructive move, which C++ does not support. Thus, the `take` operation has to be modeled using a non-destructive move in C++, which requires additional storage and runtime checks when a Swift value type is used in C++. In cases like this one, the design of how Swift language constructs are mapped to C++ should strive to be as ergonomic and as intuitive as possible, provided there's still a way to achieve appropriate performance using compiler optimizations or future extensions to the C++ language standard.

Reviewer: The Language Workgroup thinks this paragraph might make more sense in the previous section.

There should be no differences on the C++ side between using libraries that opt-in into library evolution and libraries that don’t, except in specific required cases, like checking the unknown default case of a resilient enum.

### Clear language mapping rules

> C++ is a very expressive language and it can provide representation for a lot of Swift language constructs. Not every Swift language construct will map to its direct C++ counterpart. For instance, Swift initializers might get bridged to static `init` member functions instead of constructors in C++, to allow C++ code to call failable initializers in a way that’s consistent with other initializer calls. Therefore, it’s important to provide documentation that describes how Swift language constructs get mapped to C++. It is a goal of C++ interoperability to provide a clear and well-defined mapping for how Swift language constructs are mapped to C++. Additionally, it is also a goal to clearly document which language constructs are not bridged to C++. In addition to documentation, compiler diagnostics should inform the user about types or functions that can’t be exposed to C++, when the user wants to expose them explicitly. It is a goal of C++ interoperability to add a set of clear diagnostics that let the user know when a certain Swift declaration is not exposed. It is not a goal to diagnose such cases when the user did not instruct the compiler to expose a declaration explicitly. For example, the Swift compiler might not diagnose when an exposed Swift type does not expose one of its public methods to C++ due to its return type not being exposed, if such method does not have an explicit annotation that instructs the compiler that this method must be exposed to C++.

Author: Good idea. I added something to the top:

```
+During the bringup phase of the Swift-to-C++ interoperability feature, the Swift compiler will require the API author to use an "opt-in" attribute to expose a Swift API to C++. This is an intentional choice, as early adopters of Swift-to-C++ interoperability will be able to clearly control what is exposed in the header, and they will get explicit compiler errors if they try to expose an API to C++ that's not yet supported by the implementation. This decision will be revisisted once the bulk of the Swift-to-C++ interoperability feature is implemented and approved by the Swift evolution process.
```

Some Swift APIs patterns will map to distinct C++ language constructs or patterns. For instance, an empty Swift enum with static members is commonly used in a namespace-like manner in Swift. This kind of enum can be mapped to a C++ namespace. It is a goal of C++ interoperability to provide a clear mapping for how Swift API patterns like this one are bridged to C++.

The semantics of how Swift types behave should be preserved when they’re mapped to C++. For instance, in C++, there should still be a semantic difference between Swift value and reference types. Additionally, Swift’s copy-on-write data types like `Array` should still obey the copy-on-write semantics in C++.

### Swift language evolution and API design should be unaffected

> Swift API authors should not change the way they write Swift code and design Swift APIs based on how specific Swift language constructs are exposed to C++. They should use the most effective Swift constructs for the task. It is a key goal of C++ interoperability that the exposed C++ interfaces are safe, performant, and ergonomic enough that programmers will not be tempted to make their Swift code worse just to make the C++ interfaces better.

Reviewer 2: Does this goal include that we wouldn't want users, say, opting some type `A` out of C++ interop in order to provide some wrapper `B` that exposes a more interop-friendly interface?

Author: It depends on the nature of the wrapper. Sometimes the library client might want to write their own Swift wrapper around some Swift library for use in either or both Swift and/or C++. In that case having a wrapper is totally reasonable. But in general we wouldn't want a library author to write wrapper type `B` just for the sake of easier C++ interop in their library.

Author: I haven't updated the document based on this comment. Did you want me to try to describe it in the document explicitly?

The design of new language features added to Swift during its evolution process should not be constrained by what can be represented in the generated C++ header. Such new features do not have to be exposed to C++ when it doesn't make sense to do so.

### Objective-C support

The existing Swift to Objective-C bridging layer should still be supported even when C++ bindings are generated in the generated header. Furthermore, the generated C++ bindings should use appropriate Objective-C++ types or constructs in the generated C++ declarations where it makes sense to do so. For instance, a Swift function that returns an Objective-C class instance should be usable from an Objective-C++ compilation unit.

## The approach

> The Swift compiler exposes Swift APIs to C++ by generating a header file that contains C++ declarations that wrap around the underlying calls into Swift functions that use the native Swift calling convention. The header also provides a suitable representation for Swift types. Typically, a single header file is generated for one Swift module or module interface file.

Reviewer: The Language Workgroup feels this would be clearer if you make the point about module interface files explicit:

```suggestion
The Swift compiler exposes Swift APIs to C++ by generating a header file that contains C++ declarations that wrap around the underlying calls into Swift functions that use the native Swift calling convention. The header also provides a suitable representation for Swift types. Typically, a single header file is generated for one Swift module. This generation can be done retroactively, starting from a Swift module interface file, and does not need to be requested as part of building the Swift module from source.
```

> The Swift compiler exposes Swift APIs to C++ by generating a header file that contains C++ declarations that wrap around the underlying calls into Swift functions that use the native Swift calling convention. The header also provides a suitable representation for Swift types. Typically, a single header file is generated for one Swift module or module interface file.

Author: Not necessarily , I will omit that actually.

> The Swift compiler exposes Swift APIs to C++ by generating a header file that contains C++ declarations that wrap around the underlying calls into Swift functions that use the native Swift calling convention. The header also provides a suitable representation for Swift types. Typically, a single header file is generated for one Swift module or module interface file.

Author: Actually reworded:

Typically, a client would generate one, or in some cases multiple header files for a single Swift module.

> Currently the generated header file depends on several LLVM and Clang compiler features for the Swift calling convention support, and thus it can only be compiled by Clang. The header does not depend on any other Clang-specific C++ language extensions. The header can use some other optional Clang-only features that improve developer experience for the C++ users, like specific attributes that improve diagnostics. These Clang-only features are enabled only when the Clang that is being used supports them, so older versions of Clang would still be able to consume the generated header.

Reviewer 2: Are we committing to a minimum supported Clang version here? (Or, ought we?)

Author: The compiler support will be checked, to ensure that Clang at least understands the Swift calling convention attributes. I don't think we need to mention the specific minimum Clang version in the vision document, as that feels more like an implementation detail to me.

> The generated header file uses advanced C++ features that require a recent C++ language standard. C++20 is the recommended language standard to use for Swift APIs, however, the generated header should also be compatible with C++17 and C++14.

Reviewer 2: What does "recommended" mean here? What do we lose with older standards?

The generated header file is a temporary build artifact. On platforms with ABI stability, the generated C++ code for an ABI stable Swift interface is not tied to the Swift compiler that compiled the Swift code for that Swift module, as ABI stability is respected by the C++ code in the header. In all other cases the generated C++ code in the header is assumed to be tied to the Swift compiler that compiled the Swift module, and thus the header should be regenerated when the compiler changes.

 The next few sections provide a high level overview of how Swift types and some other language constructs get bridged to C++. The exact details of how Swift language constructs are bridged will be covered by Swift evolution proposals, and additional documentation, such as this preliminary [user guide document](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/CppInteroperability/UserGuide-CallingSwiftFromC%2B%2B.md).

### Bridging Swift types

> The generated header contains C++ class types that represent Swift’s struct, enum and class types that are exposed in the Swift module. These types provide access to methods, properties and other members using idiomatic C++ constructs, or non-idiomatic C++ constructs that allow C++ to access more functionality in a consistent manner. These types follow Swift semantics. For instance, a C++ value of Swift’s struct type gets copied and destroyed using Swift’s copy and destroy semantics. C++ also provides mechanisms that allow the programmer to move such values in a destructive way, i.e. "take" them. This ensures that C++ can interoperate with a wider range of Swift APIs and types, such as Swift’s move-only types.

Author: It's the smart pointer style. 
There's currently no C++ representation for `@objc` classes, but there's no fundamental limitation on supporting it (e.g. in Metal-cpp style). We think in that case people will choose to use Objective-C++ instead to access the `@objc` class. 
If `@objc` class `Foo` has APIs that are representable in ObjC++ only, that's currently not supported (but could potentially be supported in the future). If Swift native class `Foo` has APIs that are representable in C++ only, that's already partially supported (but might be missing all required `#ifdef __OBJC__` preprocessor guards in the experimental implementation).

> The generated header contains C++ class types that represent Swift’s struct, enum and class types that are exposed in the Swift module. These types provide access to methods, properties and other members using idiomatic C++ constructs, or non-idiomatic C++ constructs that allow C++ to access more functionality in a consistent manner. These types follow Swift semantics. For instance, a C++ value of Swift’s struct type gets copied and destroyed using Swift’s copy and destroy semantics. C++ also provides mechanisms that allow the programmer to move such values in a destructive way, i.e. "take" them. This ensures that C++ can interoperate with a wider range of Swift APIs and types, such as Swift’s move-only types.

Author: There's some docs here as well describing the class implementation:
https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/main/docs/CppInteroperability/UserGuide-CallingSwiftFromC%2B%2B.md#using-swift-class-types

Protocol types also get exposed to C++. They provide access to their protocol interface to C++. The generated header also provides facilities to combine protocol types into a protocol composition type. The protocol composition type provides access to the combined protocol interface in C++. 

### Bridging generics

> Swift generic functions and types get bridged to C++ as C++ function and class templates. A generated C++ template instantiates a type-checked generic interface that uses the underlying polymorphic semantics that generics require when Swift APIs are called from the generated header. Type-checking is performed using the `requires` clause introduced in C++20. When C++17 and earlier is used, type-checking is performed using other legacy methods, like `enable_if` and `static_assert`. The two type-checking methods are compatible with the delayed template parsing compiler feature that Clang uses when building for Windows.

Reviewer 2: Ah I guess the C++17 note here partially answers my previous question

Author: Is this partial answer satisfactory, or did you want me to be more explicit about why C++20 is recommended in the document?

To help achieve the performance goals outlined in the prior section, the generated class templates specialize the storage for the underlying Swift generic type when the Swift API that is exposed to C++ contains such a bounded Swift generic type. This ensures that non-resilient bounded generic values can be stored inline in a C++ type that represents the underlying Swift type, instead of being boxed on the heap.  

> The Swift compiler generates specializations for a specific template if the Swift module pre-specializes the specific generic declaration. These C++ specializations invoke pre-specialized Swift generic code.

Reviewer 2: This seems like a spot where we may end up guiding users towards annotating their APIs for explicit specialization specifically for C++ interop, though I don't know if there's a good way to avoid that...

Author: Yes, that's a potential concern. I don't know if there's a viable way to avoid this, unless we teach Swift to pre-specialize during header generation and emit additional SIL/object code besides the header. Mind you we might want to do that in the future for `@backDeploy` /  `@_alwaysEmitIntoClient`. But for now we don't have a specific strong feeling that this will actually be required, as we did not run into a problem that demands such an optimization. Perhaps I can just omit this paragraph from the vision document then?

Author: I dropped it.

> The generated header contains C++ class types that represent Swift’s struct, enum and class types that are exposed in the Swift module. These types provide access to methods, properties and other members using idiomatic C++ constructs, or non-idiomatic C++ constructs that allow C++ to access more functionality in a consistent manner. These types follow Swift semantics. For instance, a C++ value of Swift’s struct type gets copied and destroyed using Swift’s copy and destroy semantics. C++ also provides mechanisms that allow the programmer to move such values in a destructive way, i.e. "consume" them. This ensures that C++ can interoperate with a wider range of Swift APIs and types, such as Swift’s move-only types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generated header contains C++ class types that represent the Swift struct, enum, and class types that are exposed by the Swift module. These types provide access to methods, properties and other members using either idiomatic C++ constructs or, in some cases, non-idiomatic C++ constructs that allow C++ to access more functionality in a consistent manner. The basic operations on these types follow the corresponding Swift semantics. For instance, a C++ value for a Swift class type is essentially a shared pointer that owns a reference to a Swift object, whereas a C++ value for a Swift struct type stores a Swift value of that type, and copying or destroying the C++ value copies or destroys the underlying Swift value. The C++ types also support C++ move semantics and translate them as appropriate to Swift's [`consume` operation](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0366-move-function.md). This enables high-performance use of Swift types from C++ and allows Swift's [non-copyable types](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-noncopyable-or-move-only-structs-and-enums/61903) to be exposed to C++.
```

### Standard library support

The Swift standard library contains a lot of useful functions and types that get bridged to C++. The generated standard library bindings enhance various Swift types like `Optional` and `Array` to provide idiomatic C++ APIs that allow the user to use such types in an idiomatic manner from C++.

### Using Swift types in C++ templates

> The generated header is useful in mixed-language projects as C++ sources can include it, allowing C++ to call Swift APIs. However the C++ interoperability project also provides support for calling C++ APIs from Swift. In certain cases such C++ APIs contain function or class templates that need to be instantiated in Swift. Swift gives the user the ability to use Swift types in such cases, so the C++ templates have to be instantiated with Swift types. This means that the Swift types need to be translated into their C++ counterparts, which could then be used inside the instantiated C++ template specialization. This Swift-to-C++ type translation is performed using the same mechanism that’s used by the Swift compiler to generate the header with C++ interface for a Swift module. This means that a C++ template instantiated with a Swift type will see the same C++ representation of that Swift type regardless of whether it was instantiated from C++, or from Swift.

Reviewer 2: Nit: A description of the mechanics of C++ template instantiation in Swift such as this feels slightly more appropriate in the interop doc for C++ to Swift, perhaps with a link back to this doc to explain what we mean by "C++ counterpart."

Author: Hmmm, potentially. I think I would prefer to keep it here as the key takeaway here is specific to how Swift-to-C++ interop gets applied in the forward case.
